we all care about the weather and nobody
wants to to have the weather get the
best of them one of the most devastating
aspects of hurricanes is storm surge you
look at what hurricane Helen just a few
weeks ago did it was a massive hurricane
it was 500 mil across I can give you the
best forecast in the world I can give
you plenty of lead time but it's your
decision to evacuate and we can't
control that and will we need a category
six because these category fives keep
getting bigger and bigger but it's a
storm we've never seen before when are
we getting to category
[Music]
six this is Star Talk Neil degrass Tyson
your personal astrophysicist got with me
Chuck nice Chucky baby how you doing hey
Neil So Chuck today's topic is the
weather ah excellent yes that's supposed
to be the safest thing to talk about
with anyone right no no longer oh no I
guess not very good point no longer very
good point well we know that it's
extreme and if we comb the Earth to find
who's the top weather person that's
gonna be Sam Champion WABC news he's
amazing it's it's gonna yeah every every
local news has their person who they are
certain is like the best weather
forecaster there is but we can go above
the mall because we're star and we have
access and we brought in the
chief chief head honcho of Noah the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration Dr Richard spinrad oh my
gosh Rick how you doing man hey I'm
doing great Neil Chuck delighted to be
here thanks let me get your full title
straight here the under Secretary of
Commerce for oceans and atmosphere and
that's a different title from being Noah
administrator is that right yeah
actually my full title will probably
take the full duration of this show but
it is the under Secretary of Commerce
Roan and atmosphere and the
administrator of Noah the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
so it's really two hats in this job and
we're reminded that Commerce which is a
huge branch of the US government cares
about climate and weather and because
goods and services are delivered through
the air on the waters over the land and
our relationship with climate is deeply
impacted yeah like Commerce and um the
melting uh ice that is causing Passage
through uh a near Alaska and where
there's it's a contested Waters now
because you have Russia who wants that
water uh and we of course and China and
it's all because it was ice and nobody's
looking at the point that it was
Ice what was once ice is now open Waters
it's now water right yeah yeah that's so
so so tell me a couple of things here uh
what is your relationship with the Navy
because obviously they care about oceans
as well yeah so that's a great question
because I actually worked for the Navy
for the first part of my professional
career and I was is there any part of
the government you don't work
for yeah Congress I have not worked for
congress yet and that probably won't
happen either uh but Navy I mean
obviously Navy cares about uh oceans and
climate and atmosph here uh and it's not
just how they operate their ships
they're going to be concerned about what
the impacts of climate are going to be
for their their bases you know you think
about norfol where we've got the
Atlantic Fleet and sea level rise
impacting the operations uh at the base
there it's an important element of Naval
operations and North Virginia yeah north
of Virginia yeah but I could say the
same thing about just any just about
anywhere the Navy operates they do care
about the Shor side facilities uh but
they also care about the ability to fly
uh and carry out their missions and
obviously I mean one of the strongest
components for Navy is understanding how
the ocean uh changes what are the
Dynamics of the ocean how does that
affect ships and submarines right and
also uh last I checked there's several
whole countries in the in the South
Pacific where the average sea level is
just only a few feet the aage elevation
of the land is only a few feet above sea
level so if we start melting out
glaciers we'll lose entire countries
creating is what do they call it climate
refugees this exactly exactly and and
this is not some sort of theoretical
thing that'll happen a thousand years
from now the sea level rise uh rate that
you're alluding to has increased
dramatically when I when I was a grad
student you know few decades back we
would talk about sea level rises being
say 1 to three millimeters per year in
some places it's doubled or tripled and
so consequently some of these nations
are actually going to be eliminated
before the end of this Century they'll
actually be underwater right yeah whole
islands whole island nations that will
disappear whole island nations and I
tell me of course everyone cares about
the weather although climate change has
been politicized as we all know recently
i' I'd like to remind people that Noah
was founded in the year uh
1970 and it was signed into law by a
Republican president so the
politicization
of climate um to me feels like a very
recent phenomenon because clearly we all
care about the weather and nobody wants
to to have the weather get the best of
them in any part of their life or or or
job yeah I think the the a lot of the uh
making it a political issue comes from
trying to figure out who's whose fault
this is you know who do we get to blame
for this the the thing about Noah is
that our mission is very much looking to
the Future we're about predictions and
projections and so for us it's less
about hey who caused this problem and
more about how well can we predict what
the change is going to be in the future
we talk about that's what people hold
you to because they're trying to make
decisions based on your predictions
however you you have a moving goalpost
at all times Rick because quite frankly
what happens is um these projections are
modled on what we have now okay but the
variable is is um do we increase the
amount of fossil fuel that we're burning
because I mean that's really the issue
so as you have fossil fuel burning
coming online that changes everything
that you guys said was going to happen
for instance um the predictions that
were made previous to now um basically
everybody's like oh yeah well they're
all wrong but first they were saying
they're going to be wrong because it's
not going to happen now they're saying
wrong because it's happening much
quicker yeah model would normally have a
future expectation for a rate of CO2
increase or a rate of anything isn't
that right uh Rick yeah that's right and
and this is what climate scientists
would call the Assumption of
stationarity that is to say that things
now are what they're going to be in the
future and it's not and that's the whole
point is so how do you take the models
that you were talking about Neil and uh
initialize them put the data in up front
to start the model what assumptions do
you make about how those conditions are
going to change in a year in 10 years in
20 years that's the challenge we have in
front of us but we're getting really
good and improving the skill on those
models now Rick have you has your scope
been uh I'm wondering
it I think when Noah was founded by the
way I I did a deep dive into this
hardly anyone certainly not even
geologists or biologists had ever
combined ocean and Air in the same sort
of conversation there were atmospheric
scientists there were Oceanic scientists
and the full system the full the full um
organic system of all these interplaying
parts it seemed to me only came of age a
little later when uh computer models
started having something to say about it
and so now I what I what I POs to you is
now what's under Noah purview is also
space weather like what the sun is doing
so these these look like land grabs to
me we're
spacecraft you started out with just the
ocean in there now you want like the
solar system the universe we're going
for the universe going for yeah Neil
you're exactly right and it is an earth
system and the best place to see that is
in how hurricanes form and grow and move
you can't predict that without a good
understanding of the ocean and the
atmosphere and you know the best example
on that one was uh Hurricane Katrina
which as you may remember intensified
really quickly before it made landfall
around New Orleans and we now looking
back no we could have predicted that
better if we'd had better data from the
ocean in the Gulf of Mexico
happen today you would have predicted it
better than we were able to do back in
2005 yeah certainly the what we call the
rapid intensification of the hurricane
as it made landfall and that's because
we would look at the whole ocean not
just the surface of the ocean to put the
data yeah you guys you guys I mean
you're not you're being humble Because
You're Not tooting your own horn about
this last uh huge storm that we just
experienced um where the rapid int
ification was predicted and did happen
indeed um uh due primarily to the amount
of moisture that was being held in the
land mass uh where the storm was uh
going to Traverse so you know you should
you should say yeah we didn't do it back
in 2005 but take this we did it
now I'm sorry I don't think I don't
think he speaks that way
Chu I love the way you said that though
Chuck because right I that was Rick
catch us up on on this thing with land
water and how that is not neutral as as
a
forcing as a forcing factor on a
hurricane that makes landfall what I
understood there was a recent hurricane
that saturated the landscape the the
land and so now when a hurricane makes
landfall there is sort of latent heat
available to it from the water that is
in the saturated ground or because
normally hurricane would would weaken as
it goes over the land right yeah it's
all about temperatures right and so we
know the temperatures of the ocean in
this case the Gulf of Mexico are going
up know the temperatures in the
atmosphere are going up which means that
those storms can hold more water and so
think about it we had hurricane Harvey
that hit Houston and it dropped five
feet five feet of rain when I was a kid
we didn't talk about feet of rain from
and so now you look at what hurricane
Helen just a few weeks ago did
especially in Western North Carolina and
the damage was water you're absolutely
right most people think hurricane so
it's about winds wind in that case it
was water but in terms of the forcing
function on the hurricane itself that
water that's sort of still had had had
rendered land masses uh soaked are you
saying that that does not continue to
play into the other than the water's got
nowhere else to go I guess you just get
yeah well that's basically it it it I
think it's a combination if you've got
if you've got soaked uh uh terrain from
previous precipitation prior to the
hurricane coming in and that Hurricane's
got more moisture than it would have
before Helen was also huge it was a
massive hurricane it was 500 miles
across uh and that's that's
significantly larger than most
hurricanes so large hurricane warm
Waters so more moisture available the
ground was already pretty wet and now
you're just dumping buckets onto a wet
sponge so it's going to cause a lot of
flooding why do I have in my notes that
you also care about the bottom of the
ocean like what what what what does that
do for you well there's a hole in the
bottom of the
ocean no there's a plug oh that's right
yeah yeah the bottom of the ocean is
important because without a bottom of
the ocean we wouldn't have an ocean I
guess okay more important I mean so the
Topography of the ocean is going to
drive help Drive uh how the currents uh
especially in coastal environments where
the water goes how it flows uh it's
going to impact things like uh
accentuated tides in areas where you've
got extreme changes in topography so why
is this important especially in the
context of a hurricane probably one of
the biggest problems one of the most
devastating aspects of hurricanes is
storm surge what happens to the water
the ocean water when it gets close to
the shore if the Topography is just
right you can actually funnel that storm
surge and you can end up with 12 to 15
feet that's what they got in Tampa Bay
when uh hurricane Milton hit yeah and
and Hurricane Sandy hit New York I mean
I think it was tropical storm Sandy at
the point it hit New York but that storm
surge is what took us out it we actually
call it superstorm Sandy because it was
both a tropical cyclone and then there
was an nor Easter component to it as
well so it was kind of like the worst of
all factors combined and yeah you're
right storm surge yeah I you know I grew
up in New York and mom was living in an
apartment that got flooded as a result
of superstorm sanding uh and we did not
that's interesting that was what 12
years ago we didn't have the forecast
down pat
yet you know having a front row seat to
Neil's life over the years and also
being a parent myself I absolutely love
that quote as parents there's no greater
gift we can give to our kids than the
freedom of curiosity and an eagerness to
always be learning and that's why we
here at Star Talk are honored to have
kiwi Co supporting today's episode kiwi
Co is on a mission to Spur Innovation
and creativity within our kids
delivering monthly steam learning
packages consisting of experiments
Hands-On engineering projects models
games and more the recently launched
kiwo clubs offer a variety of monthly
lines that cater to all ages and
interest kiwo Labs is for the aspiring
engineer and scientist kiwo Studio
focuses on Art and Design and they've
even got Pei Co Sprout for the younger
kiddos you want to encourage to fall in
love with steam each project Builds on
the skills that they are learning and
they are rigorously kid tested ensuring
that your kids are not only having fun
but also developing new skills along the
way so this this holiday season we
encourage you to give the gift of
Education to all the young budding
scientists in your lives unlocking a
lifetime of curiosity and creativity and
Adventure head to the link on the screen
here or use code stalk at checkout for
50% off your first monthly Club crate
that's kiwi code.com StarTalk for 50%
off your first monthly Club create okay
let's get back to the show so when did
you start reaching out and caring about
what the sun
does um well we've always had that as
part of our mission I think it's fair to
say that I mean obviously the sun has a
luminosity and an energy but but but it
at the next level the sun cycles and
there solar storms and so it's not just
that there's a star there delivering
energy to your model there are these
fluctuations in the energy to the model
that now you guys seem to car about yeah
so the the the Sun is a pretty Dynamic
uh object and uh it goes through these
Cycles right and we're actually in the
middle of one of these 11year Cycles it
started last year and one of the really
interesting aspects of that is that the
sun can occasionally actually send out
these huge huge coronal mass injections
which are these charged gases plasmas
that get ejected from the surface of the
Sun at a speed of about 1 to 2 million
miles hour uh they are on the sort of
positive side the the factors that
create the beautiful Northern Lights the
Aurora Borealis but a little bit more
insidiously they also interact with
navigation systems they interact with
electrical grids uh they can affect uh
Power grids uh they can affect uh
communication systems and so in fact the
storm that uh erupted in last May May of
2024 solar storm solar storm the solar
storm was category what we call G5
geomagnetic storm 5 highest uh rank
storm one of the most severe that we've
seen in decades but you didn't hear
about it much well I know you did Neil
but a lot hear about it and and that's
because we knew it was coming and in
years past we might not have known it
was coming and so we could make change
what kind of changes airplanes could
change their their roots in order to
avoid the impact of the solar storm on
their GPS systems can you see the actual
discharge as it makes its way here that
is so cool yes you can and in fact we
have just launched uh in June of 2024 we
launched a new satellite it's a weather
satellite it's the one that you would
use when you turn on TV and they show
you the full disc of what the weather
patterns are in the East Coast or West
Coast but this one has a compact
coronagraph oh and that is the tool I'm
sorry I you guys lost me Neil said oh
nice you said you said compact
coronograph like uh you know like I say
uh my glasses case it's just like my
glasses case and I'm like okay what is a
compact coronagraph I got this so one of
the great inventions of of the recent
Century has been the ability to create
an image of the Sun in a telescope as
though with a set of Optics as though
the sun had just been eclipsed by the
moon oh and when the sun gets eclipsed
by the moon all the bright stuff is
blotted out and you see the edge you see
explosions on the edge right you
remember when we saw the eclipse this
recent Eclipse when we were stationed up
in in Vermont uh you saw these along the
edge there were these little sort of
prominences sticking out so imagine
being able to do that at will right
rather than waiting around for an
eclipse and so now Rick you say you put
one of these in orbit that's cool Yeah
we actually have that one in orbit there
is another sensor on the Discover
satellite which is at the L1 the lrange
one point um the Earth Sun lrange yes
exactly okay now Chuck don't we have a
lrange explainer we do for those of you
who want to uh really go a deep dive on
lrange points uh we go all all through
all l12 34 and it's uh really incredible
um M5 can't leave out M5 uh
um clearly I was only a pay attention
for
four five's important because we're
really
good years all gr points are not made
equal right but if you want to see how
you can find perfect equilibrium in the
solar system uh to me that's what lrange
point represents I love exactly exactly
so it depends on which two bodies around
which you're describing the lrange
points so so Rick this is the Earth Sun
lrange points is that correct yeah and
and as you can well describe by having
multiple views of the Sun from different
angles that is to say in Earth orbit and
then at L1 and at L5 we can look at
basically the whole threedimensional
character of the sun because not all of
these coronal mass ejections are
necessarily aimed at us so we need we we
care about them all but at Noah We Care
mostly about the ones that are going to
be aimed at us and again do the math
these things travel in about 1 to two
million miles per hour Sun's 93 million
miles away so it's a you know a three to
four day transit that we can give people
enough lead time to make preparations
for a major geomagnetic storm so we can
imagine a future where we have a colony
on the moon or Mars uh where those
neither of those objects have shielding
from this kind of radiation in the way
we pretty much do here on Earth with our
atmosphere and our ozone but they don't
so presumably they would be deeply
connected Into Your Capacity to
predict because then everyone would know
to run underground or run behind
shelters this sort of thing so so can I
ask okay this might be a silly question
but I'm just asking um so with all your
equipment because Noah is really a space
organization I mean you're looking back
at Earth but all your stuff's up in the
space no no they got buoys and stuff
that's true that's true I take it back I
take it back okay you're absolutely
right um but when you when you talk
about these ejections do you move that
stuff or is that stuff just hardened or
what do you because I mean radiations
has got to be like the most damaging
thing for equipment right yeah you're
not going to be able to move this I mean
this is immense amounts of energy but
what you can do is it's it actually it's
really similar to our discussion on
hurricanes we're not going to be able to
move hurricanes and spite of what some
people may think but we can make the
predictions work and we can tell people
this one's bearing down here on Tampa
plus or minus 20 miles and you got two
days to evacuate same thing with space
weather if we get the picture especially
if you've got multiple views we can say
this is going to hit pretty hard in the
northern part of Quebec or in Asia and
therefore folks can make adjustments
they have three days they can power down
their grids they're electrical grids
they can revor aircraft so they're not
going to be affected for navigation
purposes Chuck asked about the the
satellites that are already in orbit
they certainly have susceptibility to
this and you can't just say hey Bank a
left or hover over Africa until it's
clear over Asia right you can't do that
you can't uh we can Shield some of these
to a certain extent but what we can do
is again if we know it's coming we can
make accommodations with regard to power
or use another satellite uh to cover for
the one that most be mo might be most
vulnerable the sacrifice
satellite yeah no we don't do that we
don't put them
up so there's something called
unexpected events now I foresee the day
where no event is unexpected and so no
one is taken by surprise where are we
now with regard to Noah's modeling and
other agencies modeling and things just
happening taking Everyone by surprise
there's a really interesting aspect to
your your question Neil because um
there's a there's a famous story in
meteorology it's called Isaac storm in
fact Eric Larson wrote a great book on
Isaac storm and it was a hurricane that
hit galvaston in the year 1900 for the
folks in galvaston in 1900 that storm
was an unexpected storm they didn't
expect it to hit now obviously there's
never going to be another Isaac storm
we've improved that there are things
though that happen uh on much shorter
time scales and so I would say
they may not be unexpected like
tornadoes U but the time that we're able
to give people to react to them and is
shorter so right now for tornadoes we're
looking at an average lead time on most
tornadoes of about 12 minutes whoa about
50 years ago the lead time on tornadoes
was minus five
minutes okay that doesn't even make any
sense I'm just saying when the tornadoes
over I already know there was a tornado
that's right that's right yeah there is
something wrong with that picture um
wait just just to clarify you're not
talking about the prediction of the
existence of a tornado you're talking
about the path a tornado will take once
it forms yeah yeah the path it's going
to take and how intense it's going to be
gotcha yeah and because there are like
like with hurricanes tornadoes have
classifications by intensity we have the
extended fueta scale for tornadoes one
through five uh and it's the same kind
of thing so right now we can say we
think this tornado or this uh this
aggregation of tornadoes is going to
take this path and it's probably going
to be an ef2 and it's probably going to
hit over here in 15 minutes by the way
12 minutes 15 minutes is enough time to
get out of the way of a tornado or or to
go or underground yeah underground yeah
so that's an that's incredible how do
you feel I mean do we have deep resonant
emotions uh when for example you go to
see a a movie that you know stormchasers
movie you know yeah Twisters Twisters
how how do you let's commiserate
together here now uh how do you feel
when you see these films how how much
effort do they call you and say help us
get this right or they just make stuff
up and and and and is it true that in a
tornado I can actually call a cow as it
comes by and it goes
and then
disappears of course Chuck that's a
stupid question everybody knows
that uh we are not using bow Vine
sensors and tornadoes uh for our
forecast systems yet
so the cow could just totally hook you
up on
that what is your if mind if I ask what
is Noah's annual budget uh it's just
under s billion would you say that
Noah's effort saves people and lives and
on a level far beyond the value of that
budget well I I mean we talk about
answer is yes Rick you're the head of
the
organization for Christ's sake man NE
answer is yes right thank you
Rick the uh we talk about lives and
livelihoods and and Lifestyles so
property and lives um but certainly
lives and the only reason I HED is
because I can give you the best forecast
in the world I can give you plenty of
lead time
but it's your decision to evacuate it's
your decision to take action and we
can't control that so we like to think
that two things one the quality of our
forecast is getting better and the
second is the trust by the public in
that forecast uh and the on onscreen
meteorologists and emergency managers is
high enough so that when we say you
better Evacuate the storm is coming your
way people actually take that action but
there's no question I mean I talked to
you about the the storm in galston in
the year um 1900 and I think the number
was something like 10,000 lives were
lost in that storm wow my that's not
ever going to happen again in this
country ever and that's because of the
quality of the forecast and our ability
to have the trusted people to make these
decisions so yeah absolutely we're
saving and you also affect uh forecast
for Fisheries right and other sort of
coastal management of marine food is
that a so we do Marine forecasts as part
of what the weather service does and we
also have responsibility for managing
marine fisheries uh which means we're
the ones who do the stock assessments of
how many fish are out there how healthy
are the fish how healthy are the
populations and establish regulations
for how to sustainably fish for these uh
uh these fish and maintain a strong
Seafood economy again we're part of the
Department of Commerce so it's an
important economic consideration so with
respect to what you just said uh what's
your relationship with other countries I
know we're a National Organization but
do you have international affiliations
like for the typhoon that's raging in
Taiwan right now or when it comes to
sustain sustainability of food supply
like working with China who just doesn't
give a damn
so but but what what's your role there
we we care about our Coastline and our
and our uh our Oceanic uh prop Oceanic
property line if you will but if you're
studying the entire Earth with regard to
climate do you share your data with
other countries and are they responsive
and what's your relationship yeah yeah
we absolutely can't do our job without
strong International collaboration and
that takes a couple of different forms
there are worldwide organizations as the
World Meteorological organization of
which we are a member and in fact the
head of our national weather service is
the US Representative to the wo uh and
it's these are organizations that
establish uh policies with regard to
data and yeah all of our Noah data is
publicly available uh and we use that as
if you will lever to say to other
nations hey we're giving you ours why
don't you give us yours as well so
there's a lot of collaboration for data
and they recognize they need our data to
improve their forecast we need they
their data to improve our forecast and
when you start talking about Fisheries
yeah there's a lot of international
agreements because a lot of the fish are
in open ocean Waters and there have to
be
agreements and and the Agreements are
not just about hey how much fish can we
take sustainably that is to say to allow
the population of the fish to stay stay
uh uh healthy but also to try to um be
the Protectors of those uh Fisheries by
um enforcing laws against illegal
unreported and unregulated Fisheries
what we call iuu fishing uh so that Rees
a lot of international cooperation
because you know what it's a big big
ocean you know it's not the same thing
but it's it's similar in some ways the
Artemis Accord which has recently been
signed by upwards of 30 countries or so
is a it's a new agreement about conduct
in space and space exploration signed by
space fairing Nations it's an active
Accord that's going on right now and so
for example if you send a Rover to the
moon or Mars and you learn something
about it you would share that with other
countries so if they send a Rover they
don't have to make the same mistakes you
did or that you can collaborate so uh
it's interesting how the
internationality of what you do uh
certainly uh would would contain tap
rots for doing things cooperatively in
space there there's yeah and I think
there's a lot of commonality there and
the I thought that was going through
your mind my mind as you were talking
about the emis Accords Neil is that we
to have similar kind of agreements for
making observations in the ocean there's
no one nation that can cover all of the
ocean and so uh we have a a major
program it's called Argo and it's
basically these uh robots that go
throughout the ocean and they go up and
down and all over and they drift around
and we by International agreement have
said let's all agree to what these
robots these floats should look like
let's all build them to these specs
let's put all of these things out so
there's about four or 5 thousand of
these out there now and they've been
floating around for decades and let's
all share the data in a common data
repository these are those buoys that I
was thinking about is that right these
actually dive down so they don't spend a
lot of time at the surface they they
float around and then they ascend to
about 1,000 or 2,000 meters depth they
collect temperature solinity other kind
of variables are measured they'll drift
for about 10 days days out of 2,000
meters then come back to the surface
transmit their data through satellite
Communications to a central repository
and then dive back down again and start
you know rinse and repeat basically you
know that's badass I just have to say is
yeah now you know there are some Nations
though they probably got a back door
like if you find oil don't tell anybody
else hey Star Talk fans I don't know if
you know this but the audio version of
the podcast actually posts a week in
advance of the video version and you can
get that in Spotify and apple podcast
and most other podcast Outlets that are
out there multiple ways to ingest all
that is Cosmic on Star talk let's take
up this subject of climate change for
the moment so we know I is it the is the
fraction a third so for every x amount
of CO2 that goes into the atmosphere
does the ocean uptake about a third of
that or some fraction of it yeah yeah
there's a variety of estimates but
that's that's pretty close maybe even
closer to a half but definitely a large
percentage okay so and the that means
the dissolved CO2 in the ocean is in
some form of partial pressure
equilibrium with the CO2 in the air so
if we were to stop CO2 production or
even introduce CO2 scrubbers in the
atmosphere we will do this but then
there's less CO2 pressing down on the
ocean and the ocean says I have to make
this in make equilibrium out of this and
it'll start releasing and it gives it up
to the atmosphere gives it up to the
atmosphere so is it true that we would
not see the immediate effects for quite
some time perhaps decades even if we
stopped all fossil fuel burning today
the short answer to your question Neil
is yes people talk about the flywheel in
the carbon cycle uh you could stop the
introduction uh interesting you raised
the question of actually actively
removing carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere which would accelerate the
the diminishment of excess carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere but it would
still be yeah you're right decades
before we would see the ocean responding
in Kind part of the uh the problem uh
with the dynamic you described is that
the increased carbon dioxide dissolution
in the ocean manifests as ocean
acidification
right pH thing going on okay of course
yeah and so in that case it's not simply
a matter of it's not like opening up a
bottle of of of Coca-Cola and having all
the CO2 uh go back out of the liquid
into the atmosphere a lot of this CO2
has become part of the carbon cycle
within the atmosphere in in including
with a decrease in PH and increased
acidification and that's where you see
the uh complete bleaching of coral reefs
and the death of of of these coral reefs
which by the way are their in entire
ecosystems in themselves yeah yeah
that's part of it uh in fact the the
major contribution to Coral bleaching is
actually the temperature temperature the
warming of the water but because of the
chemical makeup of most corals The
increased acidification uh is very
erosive gross of vent corls so when
people talk about terraforming Mars and
moving there
I'm sorry that was just an excellent
segue Earth be uh my rebuttal to that
it's not rebuttal my comment on it is if
we have the power of geoengineering to
turn Mars into Earth then we have the
power of geoengineering to turn Earth
back into Earth you wouldn't need Mars
right yeah to do that and so that's kind
of how I how I view that so Rick this
past hurricane season
the was it just my imagination or were
there more category lives kicking in
than usual and if so is that the new
normal and what what what is the new
normal right now today I we're recording
this in October it's like 75 degrees
outside uh when it says unseasonably
warm temperatures today will that soon
become seasonably
warm that's unseasonable becomes
seasonable because that's the new normal
and will we need a category six because
these category fives keep getting bigger
and bigger and it keep saying category
five but it's a storm we've never seen
before when are we getting to category
six Chuck stop poking the bear what
you're doing I love that question Chuck
and I will get to it in a minute I but
what I I do want to say is um yeah I
keep thinking about uh the New York
Times Colonist Tom Freedman who said
it's not global warming it's Global
weirding weirding and you know and if
think about it Neil we don't talk global
warming anymore we talk climate change
and that's because it manifests in so
many many different ways and and
fundamentally fundamentally what we're
doing is we're putting more energy into
the system because of the greenhouse
effect there's more energy coming into
the system so your question about uh
what's going to be seasonable or not
seasonable what are the storms look like
things are going to be different uh this
year for example we predicted an above
normal uh hurricane season and it's
turning out it is above normal by
certain measures is that going to become
The New Normal well I think just logic
suggests that we can probably see a lot
more hurricane activity in the future in
terms of the intensity of storms how
much water they have with them that sort
of thing which gets to Chuck's comment
and that is you know my take is it's not
about do we need another category a
category six in the saffer Simpson scale
want you to name it after him a a Chuck
hurricane is a category six hurricane
well there's something wrong with
calling something a nice hurricane
that's the no not we'll call it not so
nice not so nice no you leave out his
last name just called the Chuck
hurricane the Chuck
hurricane what we really need in that
regard is uh to expand the focus because
you know the the saffer Simpson scale is
really a measure of of wind right uh how
strong are the winds and you see that
every time hey the winds have just
gotten to 130 M miles an hour so now
it's a cat war that kind of thing but
when you look at what these hurricanes
are doing we're looking at impacts of
storm surge I talked about the volumes
of water from hurricanes like like
Harvey years ago we need people to
understand that we should be looking at
more than just what the peak wind is
because you could have a cat five with
really strong 170 m hour winds but it
may not have the impact that a cat 3 has
with a large volume of water like
hurricane h
we find way for people the full me of
what the hurricanes are what they look
and what their imps going to be and let
me toot your horn for a moment here in
the
1989 sequel to Back to the Future titled
Back to the Future Part Two uh they went
into the future the year
2015 and so we're watching this movie in
1989 and they're they are Imagining the
year 2015 and there's a point where
Marty and and
and Doc get out of the car and Doc puts
up an umbrella and Marty says what are
you doing he says oh this is the future
weather forecasting is now we know the
exact minute it's going to start to rain
and right in that instant it starts to
rain and it stops ready stops and then
it stops and he puts the umbrella away
we're not exactly there but of course on
our smartphones it'll show you when the
rain is going to begin where you are and
where it's end that's what I'm saying
that's true I never even thought of that
but it's it gives you the time of day
like 3 p.m. starts yeah in your spot and
and it tells you how much and how
intense and Chuck when we were growing
up it was like all you really want to
know what what might it rain tomorrow
because you have a and then they give
you a 50% chance which means they know
absolutely nothing right your
grandmother knew more my badis is acting
up my shoulder I tell you baby it's
going to rain tomor my shoulder how for
all you know Noah's got Grandma's in the
back
room yeah
right e how's your knee I tell you I
tell you it's going to rain and eel
predicts the Hurricanes
exactly well you know it's interesting
because I was gonna say Neil that yeah I
do have a couple apps on my phone in
fact and I use it for just that okay you
know should we have that picnic now or
should we wait an hour that kind of
thing and that's less about the
prediction and more about the
observations and so the The Radars that
we've got the satellites have got so
much resolution right now that you can
start doing that you can right within an
hour or two you can say hey this storm I
mean I use it all the time when I'm when
I'm walking my dog I'm saying all right
should I do it now or should I wait an
hour so you're say you're saying that's
because we have real-time observation of
what's exactly exactly yeah yeah and we
can uh and tornadoes are a really good
example you know we've gotten really
good at observing tornadoes using some
of the new sophisticated applications we
use something called dual polarization
on our weather radars which is in the
old Radars it was basically just send
out a signal and see what comes back and
now we can start manipulating the signal
looking at the polarization of the
signal to determine uh is that rain is
it sleet is it snow and get such good
resolution that we can say yeah it's
sleet but we know the temperature two
miles away is warmer and we can see how
fast it's coming so in an hour it's
going to be rain over
here okay so cool man we actually fly
through the hurricanes and we've been
doing that for quite a while we have uh
two actually more than that we have at
least three airplanes that we use to fly
through or over the Hurricanes that's
the right stuff right there want talk
right stuff man and I've done that once
I did it once with our team who you got
piss off to get that
job but all fair is Rick if I I I some
of the math on this if you're standing
there on stationary Earth and 170 mph
wind is coming by you that that's going
to Tumble buses and trucks and the cow
of course will fly by however um an
airplane in open air flies 500 600 miles
an hour way faster than the air in a
hurricane so is it not as dangerous for
an airplane as you might otherwise think
yeah I I'm going to be the first to tell
you it is a d dangerous thing to do but
our crews are real Aces they are amazing
professionals and the equipment that we
fly we actually fly 50-year-old
airplanes but we're scheduled to buy
some brand new ones here soon and we fly
uh Navy p3s the same airplanes that the
Navy used to use to find submarines and
here's the kicker that we fly them high
enough through the hurricane that yeah
when you go through the eyewall the
hurricane where there's extraordinary
vertical uh wind currents you're going
to go through several thousand feet of
uh uh elevation change if you did that
on a commercial flight to Cleveland uh
you'd have a real problem and you'd be
sending a complaint to the airline G to
be a lot of uh vouchers giving out at
the end of that flight and and we do it
repeatedly we'll fly we'll do like a a a
figure four pattern through the
hurricane two or three times and then
the other really cool thing though is we
don't just fly those aircraft through
the Hurricanes at say 8 10,000 ft we
also drop drones from the airplanes so
that they those drones can then fly at
the lower altitudes and get all the data
we need so you know when you talked
about not just Jo writing you're getting
data at every turn oh we're getting data
up the Wu real time it's going back to
the National Hurricane Center they are
assimilating those data into the
predictive models and because of those
flights the track and intensity
forecasts have improved by 10 15 20% so
that real-time message to the guy on the
beach who says I don't know if I should
evacuate or not uh has gotten so much
better look at the look at the tracks
from Hurricane Milton you saw that two
three days out we were saying it's gonna
hit Tampa St Pete and we were spot on y
they were totally tight so Rick as a
weather phenomena around the world even
if it's just simply higher temperatures
than ever before uh whatever is the
phenomenon that's stretching the limits
of what might have been models that were
comfortably contained within certain
parameters every time there's an
unprecedented
event uh that you didn't predict what is
what do you have to do with your models
what what's what's the next step here
yeah that's a a great question
especially if you kind of extend it and
say how does something like AI or
machine learning artificial intelligence
and machine learning fit in here um and
these uh extraordinary events and I
think some of the heat waves we've seen
some of the droughts we've seen are
examples uh they end up providing an
incredible volume of new data and our
artificial intelligence applications
depend critically on what we call
training data so the data from what has
happened in the past being used as
training for the models of the future so
I would argue when we don't fully
characterize a particular event with our
forecast
but we are able to collect all the data
from that event we are by definition
improving our ability to use AI
techniques machine learning techniques
except by definition your AI That's
mining the data will not have data that
it has never seen that is yet to see
which is the argument for making sure we
fully measure and characterize these
extreme events and so a lot of our
investment at Noah is building the
systems that provide uh much more
intense higher temporal resolution in
the data for things like extreme
precipitation one of the main things
we're trying to do right now it's a
clarify temporal resolution you can
think of spatial resolution you know how
much detail do you have from A to B to
see in location but temporal resolution
would be what's happening this hour this
minute this second and so it's a
resolution over time in case people were
wondering everybody wants to know what's
happening in their neighborhood right
and a lot of
exactly um right and if all I can tell
you is well we've got data from York
County for the last uh month that's not
good enough and so what we're trying to
do is really increase our ability to
collect data which means having
volunteer observation programs it means
using sophisticated new technologies I
talked about our Radars our Radars we
have 122 Radars around the country uh
and these Radars are many decades old
and there's some new technology out
there things like phased array radar
that we might be able to use to get the
sort of higher resolution observations
it sounds to me like
NOA might need a bigger
budget I'm just saying we're flying
around in 50 year old prop planes okay
we got sensors that are old and 20 years
old 20 years old like we need like come
on Congress Let's Make It Rain On Noah
20 years ago there were no smartphones
and YouTube didn't exist so terms of
where we are we do I mean if you look at
the full no Mission it's really pretty
incredible we've been talking mostly
about weather here space weather
atmospheric weather but we also make all
the the nautical charts you know if
you're a boater and you want the chart
you want to know how deep the water is
and where the shallow areas we do that
we manage Marine protected areas we
haven't even talked about our fisheries
management and you know what it costs
every American for all of these Services
it costs six cents per day here's what
we need we need Sarah mlin to sing a
song to sing the song and then we could
tell people for only six cents a
day we can support Noah in a way
that s
m right they need a Sarah mclin Worthy
song yes
exactly right just let it let it flow
from nautical charts
to Aurora
boreales Noah is in your life and for
only eight cents a day which is two more
pennies than what you're paying
now well Rick thanks for making time for
us thank you uh you know we last cross
paths back when we were trying to figure
out how to see this last Eclipse uh and
a lot of a lot of folks saw some were
clouded out but eclipses can happen
again and we have things called
airplanes that could take to where the
next eclipse is you'll have to wait for
it to come to your farm again but I just
want to say uh it's been a delight
having you on here and uh if do you
think you would uh are you likely to be
replaced I mean are you a political
appointee I am a political appointee and
so I serve with the pleasure of the
president so I mean I think you're the
right guy SE several people such as
there have been several NASA
administrators that went through
multiple presidents and multiple parties
yeah so that was a reminder to me me or
to us all that certain activities of the
nation um transcend politics and
transcend the political leadership
because they're they're surfing on
science that is the underpinning of it
all I know more about science than all
the
scientists all right so we gotta go so
give my regards to your whole agency
this has been a blast and Chuck it has
been a pleasure thank you so much Rick
thanks for being Star Talk we we love
everything you told us and it gives us
great hope for the future indeed Chuck
always good to have you man it is always
a pleasure all right Neil degrass Tyson
here you're a personal astrophysicist as
always I bid you to keep looking
[Music]
up all